## Summary of results
Nationally, our model results find that vaccinating the elderly (65+) and high-risk is significantly
more important (~ 4.5% averted) than modifying vaccine campaign timing or vaccinating everyone 
(~ 5.5% averted).  We do see a fair 
amount of variance in these conclusions from state to state—based on uptake rates and relative 
outbreak timings.

## Explanation of observed dynamics given model assumptions
The model was designed to capture historically consistent timings and relative magnitudes by state.
As a result, trajectories tend to have one peak in the summer and another peak in the winter, but 
uncertainty is often high concerning both overall magnitude and which peak is larger.  There are 
implicit and explicit model characteristics that keep median burdens near the calibration season
(2024-25) burden.  It should be acknowledged that since the emergence of Omicron, there has been
a steady decline in seasonal burdens.  This model does not attempt to capture seasonal
decline.  Conversely, the model also does not attempt to estimate the likelihood or magnitude
of a new, significantly different variant.

## Model assumptions: please describe:
### Number/type of immune classes considered
Our model contains 4 levels of immunity (Vax 'Sv', Vax-wane 'Svw', recovered-waned 'Si', 
and baseline-susceptible 'S'), 
or 5 levels if you include the Recovered state 'R'—which grants complete immunity for a short period
following infection.

### Initial distribution of susceptibility (if available)
This is fit for each state at the beginning of the calibration season (May 2024), and then the final 
state of the calibration-season becomes the initial state of the projection season.  So the distribution
at t=0 can vary quite a bit, but generally fall in these ranges: S - 55 to 75\%, Si - 10 to 25\%, 
Svw - 3 to 7\%, Sv - 1 to 3\%, R - 5 to 15\%.

### Initial variant characteristics (transmissibility of variants at t=0, and how uncertainty or non-identifiability was handled)
The model does not stratify for variants.  Variant characteristics are handled entirely through immune 
escape rate.

### Details about calibration of immunity at t=0 (calibration period considered, assumptions about/fitting of past immune escape and waning immunity, is the same calibration process used for all scenarios?)
See description of Initial distribution of susceptibiility.  Immune escape and waning times are 
fixed.  A single calibration is used to project all 5 scenarios.

### Details about modeling of immune escape after t=0 (including what is the level of immune escape considered, whether a stepwise or continuous escape was considered and how immune escape affects infection- and vaccine-induced immunity)
Immune escape is set to a rate of 30\% per year.  In most compartments, this is handled as a proportional 
trickle back to the baseline susceptibility 'S' compartment.  In the vaccinated Sv compartment,
immune escape is handled as a time-dependent reduction in VE based on vax campaign start date.

### Assumptions regarding waning immunity against infection and symptoms (including values used for the duration and level of protection against infection or symptomatic disease, whether a point estimate was used or a range, and distribution used)
Waning times are fixed point estimates.  The R state wanes to Si with a 4 month waiting time.  Si wanes
to S with an 8 month waiting time.  Sv wanes to Svw with a 4 month waiting time.  Svw wanes to S with 
an 8 month waiting time.  Si has no immunity against infection, and a fit level of immunity against 
hospitalization.  Svw has one-half immunity against infection as Sv, and the same immunity against 
hospitalization as Sv.  Sv immunity is described in detail below.

### Assumptions regarding waning immunity against severe disease (including whether immunity against severe disease, conditional on infection, is fixed vs declines over time; and if it wanes, specify how)
Waning immunity is generally handled as movement between compartments. The exception is reduction in 
VE due to immune escape.  This is handled as a linear decrease in VE consistent with a 30\% escape per
year.

### Assumptions regarding boosting effect from multiple infections
No boosting from multiple infections.

### Is vaccination assumed to prevent infection and/or transmissibility?
The vaccination is assumed to reduce susceptibility, but not transmissibility.  The parameters are
initially divided as suscept_reduce = 7/9*VE and IHR_reduce = 2/9*VE.  During calibration, an 
additional scaling parameter \alpha is introduced suscept_reduce = \alpha*7/9*VE and 
IHR_reduce = \alpha*2/9*VE and fit such that model VE from Sep 2025 to Dec 2025 is 45\%.

### Describe the process used to set or calibrate disease severity, ie P(hosp given current infection) and P(death given current infection) details. What are the datasets used for calibration of the death targets?
The VE portion of IHR is described in the previous section.  Otherwise, IHR has fixed relative
risk for the older 3 age groups, and 2 fit parameters for each state: pediatric proportional
IHR, and overall IHR.  For mortality, we use only 2 age groups 0-64 and 65+.  The relative age
risk is fixed, and the overall hospitalization-to-mortality rate is fit.

### Describe seasonality implementation, e.g., whether seasonality varies by geography, what is the function used to model seasonal forcing, and which datasets are used to fit seasonal parameters
Seasonality is fit independently for each state using an arbitrary 5-segment tanh function. 
This is essentially a smoothed step function.  The calibration usually results in a small bump
in transmissibility in the summer and larger bump in the winter.  Calibration uses 2024-25 pediatric
and adult hosptitalization time-series, all-age mortality time-series, and estimated vaccination
time-series.  The parameterization of seasonality is inferred simultaneously with all other
model fit parameters.  So essentially all model assumptions play a role in this determination.

### What is the calibration period used to fit the model? How is the period of low reporting in hospitalization data in May-Nov 2024 handled?
The calibration period is May 2024 through May 2025.  For weeks where a state reported less than
80\% in the NHSN data, we substituted the proxy data generated by CFA.  All hospitalization data
then received a 3-week smoothing.  In weeks where proxy data was substituted, it received a 
lower weight in the calibration objective function.  There were four states that were treated 
differently: AZ, HI, NV, WY.  In these states, proxy data received a weight of zero. In our 
model, this means that the summer months were calibrated using only mortality data.

### Details about modeling of age-specific outcomes, including assumptions on age-specific parameters (e.g., susceptibility, infection hospitalization risk or fatality risk, VE)
Our model is stratified to the following age groups: 0-17, 18-64 low-risk, 18-64 high-risk, and 65+.
 Most parameters (including susceptibility and VE) were not age specific.  Number of contacts is 
age dependent based on the MOBS contact matrices.  Infection-hospitalization risk is age-dependent
based on a combination of (Stokes et al, MMWR June 2020) and seasonal age totals from COVID-NET. 
We find that pediatric rates vary state by state, so pediatric relative risk is modulated 
by a fit parameter for each state.  Hospitalization-
mortality relative age risk (0-64, 65+) is based on national-level COVID-NET data.

### Details about modeling of high-risk individuals, e.g., susceptibility and infection hospitalization risk or infection fatality risk, VE
High risk individuals are only treated differently in terms of increased infection-hospitalization
risk.  We note that raising the IHR in our model implicitly raises the odds of mortality by the 
same proportion.

### Is empirical data on human mobility or contact patterns used in the model?
Mobility - no.  Contact patterns - we use contact matrices from MOBS lab.

### Is there a background level of non pharmaceutical interventions?
The arbitrary nature of our forcing function allows for it to implicitly fit seasonal changes
in human behavior, but we do not explicitly model non pharmaceutical interventions.

### Is importation from other countries considered?
No

### Other updates in model assumptions from previous rounds (e.g., demographic dynamics, immune escape, severity)
This year, we made the model less focused on trying to predict what will happen in the next year, 
and more focused on generating a range of trajectories that fit both the calibration season, and 
the patterns previously observe in each state during the projection season.  In this way, we 
capture characteristics like: FL has had a stronger summer wave each of the last 3 years, PA tends
to have a stronger winter wave, and KY tends to be more balanced between summer and winter.  We 
believe that this methodology makes our model more appropriate for estimating the \%-averted of the
various scenarios. This comes with some cost to the model's ability to predict target timing and 
magnitudes, but is ultimately more appropriate to the primary question at hand.
